New devtools extension article (#2209)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/extensions-chromium/developer-guide/devtools-extension.md

---
title: Create a DevTools extension
description: In this tutorial, you learn to build a Microsoft Edge extension that extends DevTools. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working DevTools extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools extension APIs.
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
ms.technology: extensions
ms.date: 9/27/2022
---
# Create a DevTools extension

> This tutorial shows you how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It is a good way to experience everything that is needed for typical development. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It's a good way to experience everything that's needed for typical development. At the end of the tutorial, you'll have a working extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools APIs.
```
consider running Acrolinx

> This tutorial shows you how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It is a good way to experience what goes into a typical DevTools extension. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working DevTools extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools extension APIs.

Reviewer 2: We say "DevTools extension" 4 times in this line. Its too much. I would re-phrase it to something like this:

This tutorial shows you how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It is a good way to experience everything that is needed for typical development. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools APIs.

> This tutorial shows you how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It is a good way to experience what goes into a typical DevTools extension. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working DevTools extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools extension APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows you how to build your own DevTools extension from scratch. It is a good way to experience everything that is needed for typical development. At the end of the tutorial, you should have a working extension that creates its own panel and interacts with the DevTools APIs.
```

> First please review the prerequisites. Then download and run the final extension from the [Solution](#solution) section to see what you will be building in this tutorial. Otherwise, start at the [Step 1 - Create a Basic DevTools Extension](#step-1---create-a-basic-devtools-extension) section to build the extensions from scratch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First review the prerequisites. Then download and run the final extension from the [Solution](#solution) section to see what you will be building in this tutorial. Otherwise, start at the [Step 1 - Create a Basic DevTools Extension](#step-1---create-a-basic-devtools-extension) section to build the extensions from scratch.
```
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/p/please

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Prerequisites

* [Microsoft Edge Browser](https://www.microsoft.com/edge) to run the extension.
* A code editor such as [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) to follow along with the tutorial.

> * Knowledge of [GitHub](https://github.com/) to download the code presented in this tutorial.

Reviewer: fyi the DevTools docs need a general h2 to link to that describes the repo green Code button that has 3-4 options including download .zip and Clone and Open in GH Desktop.  My PR to redesign DevTools for VS Code extension adds such h2 saying how to clone in VS Code.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Solution

> In this section, you download and run the final state of the extension that the rest of this tutorial will teach you to build. Later, you will start from scratch and learn to write the code to create your own extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you download and run the final state of the extension that the rest of this tutorial will teach you to build. Later, you'll start from scratch and learn to write the code to create your own extension.
```
Global: contractions per style guide / Acrolinx as appropriate per emphasis.

> 1. Get the final extension code by [downloading this zip file](https://codeload.github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/zip/refs/heads/main) and extracting its content to a folder on your computer.

Reviewer: I question whether "knowledge of GitHub" is a prereq above.  The specific step is near trivial and is given here.  Delete from Prereq section?

Author: I'll delete the prereq. You're right, it's not needed. An earlier version of this tutorial required to clone the repo, but this is no longer needed.

> 1. Open Microsoft Edge and navigate to the `edge://extensions/` page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open Microsoft Edge and go to the `edge://extensions/` page.
```
usu. avoid 'navigate', per style guides

> 1. Make sure that **Developer mode** is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Turn on the **Developer mode** toggle.
```
off for me by default.
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/t/toggle

> 1. Click **Load unpacked** and navigate to the folder where you extracted the zip file. In this folder, select **Demos-main** > **devtools-extension** > **sample 4**, and then click **Select Folder**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Load unpacked** and navigate to the folder where you extracted the zip file. In this folder, select **Demos-main** > **devtools-extension** > **sample 4**, and then click the **Select Folder** button:
```
check whether "go" or "navigate" per style guides 
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/n/navigate
& Edge Dev Style Guide
Navigate might be more natural than 'go' here.

  ![The edge://extensions page in Microsoft Edge, showing the Developer mode and Load unpacked buttons.](./devtools-extensions-images/edge-extensions-page.png)

> Your DevTools extension should now be loaded. Open a new tab in Microsoft Edge then open DevTools by pressing `F12`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your DevTools extension should now be loaded. Open a new tab in Microsoft Edge, and then open DevTools by pressing `F12`.
```

> The extension creates a `Sample Panel` in the DevTools window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension creates a `Sample Panel` in the DevTools window:
```

![Microsoft Edge, showing DevTools on the side, with the extension's Sample Panel selected.](./devtools-extensions-images/solution-sample-panel.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Step 1 - Create A Basic DevTools Extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1 - Create a Basic DevTools Extension
```
does Acrolinx catch this?

> A basic DevTools extension consists of 2 files, as shown in the [Step 1 code](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/devtools-extension/sample%201):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A basic DevTools extension consists of two files, as shown in [Step 1 code](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/devtools-extension/sample%201):
```
check percent 201 in link.  Click the h2 to see URL in rendered page.

    | description | The description of the extension that will be displayed under the name of the extension. |
    | version | The version of the extension that will appear next to the name of the extension. |
    | manifest_version | Determines the set of features that the extension will be using such as Service workers or Network request modification. The current version is version `3`. To learn more about this version and the differences with version `2`, see [Overview and timelines for migrating to Manifest V3](./manifest-v3.md). |
    | devtools_page | The path to an HTML file that will be executed every time the DevTools UI is opened. Though the page is not rendered in DevTools, it will be used to load the necessary JavaScript files for the extension. |

1. An html file to match the `devtools_page` field in the manifest file.

    ```html
    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta charset="UTF-8" />
      </head>
      <body>
        A Basic DevTools Extension.
      </body>
    </html>
    ```

To load and test your DevTools extension in Microsoft Edge, use the **Developer mode**:

> 1. Open Microsoft Edge and navigate to the `edge://extensions/` page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In Microsoft Edge, go to `edge://extensions/`.
```

1. Make sure that **Developer mode** is enabled.

1. Click **Load unpacked**, navigate to the folder where you wrote the code for your extension, and click **Select folder**.

> Your DevTools extension should now be loaded. Open a new tab and then open DevTools (`F12`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your DevTools extension is now loaded. Open a new tab and then open DevTools (`F12`).
```

> Your  extension is loaded but invisible in DevTools because you have not created a panel for the extension yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your  extension is loaded, but isn't displayed in DevTools yet, because you haven't created a panel for the extension.
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Step 2 - Add a DevTools Panel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2 - Add a DevTools panel
```

> In this step, you will create a new panel in DevTools. You can find the code for this step here: [Step 2 code](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/devtools-extension/sample%202), or write it yourself by following the instructions below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step, you'll create a new panel in DevTools. You can find the code for this step in [Step 2 code](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/devtools-extension/sample%202), or write it yourself by following the instructions below.
```

> A panel is a tab in the main toolbar in DevTools similar to the **Elements**, **Console**, or **Sources** tools shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _panel_ is a tab in the main toolbar in DevTools, similar to the **Elements**, **Console**, and **Sources** tools shown below:
```
what about Drawer

    ```javascript
    document.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
      chrome.runtime.sendMessage({
          click: true,
          xPosition: event.clientX + document.body.scrollLeft,
          yPosition: event.clientY + document.body.scrollTop
        },
        response => {
          console.log("Received response", response);
        }
      );
    });
    ```

    The above code snippet prints a message to the console when the script is injected in the page. It also adds a click event listener to the page that will send a message with mouse click position in the inspected page by using the `chrome.runtime.sendMessage` API.

1. In the `panel.html` file, add a `sayHello` button and a `youClickedOn` label . These two elements are used to demo the interaction between the inspected page, the DevTools panel, and the background service worker. When the user clicks the `sayHello` button in the DevTools extension, it will display a greeting message in the inspected window. When the user clicks anywhere in the inspected page, it will display a message to show the mouse click position in the DevTools extension panel.

    ```html

>     <button id="sayHello">Say Hello to The Inspected Page!</button>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <button id="sayHello">Say Hello to the inspected page!</button>
```
def. lowercase 'the'

    <h2><span id="youClickedOn"></span></h2>
    ```

> 1. In the `devtools.js` file, use the `chrome.runtime.connect` method to create a connection to the background service worker, then send the inspected window `tabId` to the service worker with the `backgroundPageConnection.postMessage` method. Finally, add event listeners to the `sayHello` button and `youClickedOn` label defined in the  `panel.html` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the `devtools.js` file, use the `chrome.runtime.connect` method to create a connection to the background service worker, and then send the inspected window `tabId` to the service worker by using the `backgroundPageConnection.postMessage` method. Finally, add event listeners to the `sayHello` button and `youClickedOn` label defined in the  `panel.html` file.
```
check against 
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/u/using-by-using-with

    ```javascript
    let youClickedOn; 
    chrome.devtools.panels.create("Sample Panel", "icon.png", "panel.html", panel => {
        // code invoked on panel creation
        panel.onShown.addListener( (extPanelWindow) => {
            let sayHello = extPanelWindow.document.querySelector('#sayHello');
            youClickedOn = extPanelWindow.document.querySelector('#youClickedOn');
            sayHello.addEventListener("click", () => {
                // show a greeting alert in the inspected page

>                 chrome.devtools.inspectedWindow.eval('alert("Hello from the DevTools Extension");');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                chrome.devtools.inspectedWindow.eval('alert("Hello from the DevTools extension");');
```

    });

    chrome.runtime.onMessage.addListener((request, sender, sendResponse) => {
        // Messages from content scripts should have sender.tab set
        if (sender.tab && request.click == true) {
            console.log('I am here!');
            if (youClickedOn) {
                youClickedOn.innerHTML = `You clicked on position (${request.xPosition}, ${request.yPosition}) in the inspected page.`;
            }
            sendResponse({
                xPosition: request.xPosition,
                yPosition: request.yPosition
            });
        }
    });

    // Create a connection to the background service worker
    const backgroundPageConnection = chrome.runtime.connect({
        name: "devtools-page"
    });

    // Relay the tab ID to the background service worker
    backgroundPageConnection.postMessage({
        name: 'init',
        tabId: chrome.devtools.inspectedWindow.tabId
    });
    ```

    When the user clicks the `sayHello` button, the DevTools extension will execute a code snippet of `alert("Hello from the DevTools Extension");` in the inspected window by invoking the `eval()` method of the inspected window `chrome.devtools.inspectedWindow`.

>     When the user clicks anywhere in the inspected window, the DevTools extension will get a message, from the background service worker, with `request.click == true` and the mouse position information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When the user clicks anywhere in the inspected window, the DevTools extension will receive a message, from the background service worker, with `request.click == true` and the mouse position information.
```
tech review this suggestion, how active is the getting on the part of this actor

> 1. Create the `background.js` file and add the following code to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the `background.js` file and add the following code to it:
```
i use colon where possible to glue flow/meaning together

        // Assign the listener function to a variable so we can remove it later
        let devToolsListener = (message, sender, sendResponse) => {
            if (message.name == "init") {
                id = message.tabId;
                connections[id] = devToolsConnection;
                // Send a message back to DevTools
                connections[id].postMessage("Connected!");
            }
        };

        // Listen to messages sent from the DevTools page
        devToolsConnection.onMessage.addListener(devToolsListener);

        devToolsConnection.onDisconnect.addListener(() => {
            devToolsConnection.onMessage.removeListener(devToolsListener);
        });
    });
    ```

    The above code snippet connects the background service worker with the DevTools page. It listens to when the DevTools page connects, saves the connection, and sends a response back to the DevTools page.

    This is useful when your background service worker is collecting data or performing tasks in the background that you want to be available in your DevTools extension.

To test the new `sayHello` button:

1. Navigate (or go back) to the `edge://extensions/` page.

> 1. Find the unpacked extension entry you loaded in step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Find the unpacked extension entry that you loaded in Step 1.
```

1. Click **Reload**.

> 1. Open a new browser tab, open DevTools (`F12`), and click **Sample panel**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open a new browser tab, open DevTools (`F12`), and click the **Sample Panel** tab.
```

1. Click the `"Say Hello to The Inspected Page!"` button in your panel. You should see an alert in the inspected page, as shown below.

    ![Microsoft Edge, showing the new extension panel in DevTools on the side, and an alert dialog window](./devtools-extensions-images/devtools-extension-show-greeting.png)

To learn more about content scripts, see [the Content Scripts documentation](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/content_scripts/).

To test the `youClickedOn` label:

1. Click **OK** to close the alert window opened in the previous step.

1. Click anywhere in the inspected page. A **You clicked on position (x,y) in the inspected page** message should appear in the extension panel.

    ![The sample panel in DevTools showing the clicked position message](./devtools-extensions-images/devtools-extension-show-position.png)

1. Open the **Console** tool. A message similar to the previous step should also appear in the  **Console** tool.

    ![The DevTools Console tool showing the clicked position message](./devtools-extensions-images/devtools-extension-show-position-in-console.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: consider moving or copying to top of page a different variant version of this list, per mgmt.
Consider changing to list in one spot.

> In this tutorial, you learned how to create DevTools extensions from scratch and load them into the browser.  You extended DevTools by creating a new panel to display memory information using APIs available to Microsoft Edge extensions.  And then you added a content script to detect the mouse clicks on a webpage, and sent that information to DevTools. Finally, you learned how to send and receive messages between a background service worker and DevTools. The background service worker is able to track the mouse clicks in the background and log outputs in the DevTools console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned how to create a DevTools extension from scratch and load it into the browser.  You extended DevTools by creating a new panel to display memory information by using APIs that are available to Microsoft Edge extensions.  And then you added a content script to detect the mouse clicks on a webpage, and sent that information to DevTools. Finally, you learned how to send and receive messages between a background service worker and DevTools. The background service worker tracks the mouse clicks in the background and logs output in the DevTools console.
```
